Sharding and other updates (#20)
nixpkgs-architecture/simple-package-paths: README.md

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Make trivial top-level attribute definitions in `pkgs/top-level/all-packages.nix` be auto-generated from a predictable attribute-based file hierarchy.
This makes it much easier to contribute new packages packages, since there's no more guessing needed as to where the package should go, both in the ad-hoc directory categories and in `pkgs/top-level/all-packages.nix`.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

> - (Especially new) package contributors are having a hard time figuring out which files to add or edit. These are very common questions:

Reviewer: I am not sure if that will improve the situation for new people. They will still have questions and they will just be different.

Author: It will certainly improve the situation! It removes some of the most annoying problems to deal with when contributing changes to packages. And yes this won't fix all the problems, just one of the most prominent ones. And just because there's always more problems doesn't mean solving one won't improve the situation.

  - Which directory should my package definition go in?
  - What are all the categories and do they matter?
  - What if the package has multiple matching categories?
  - Why can't I build my package after adding the package file?
  - Where in all-packages.nix should my package go?
- Figuring out where an attribute is defined is a bit tricky:
  - First one has to find the definition of it in all-packages.nix to see what file it refers to

>     - On GitHub this is even more problematic, as the `all-packages.nix` file is [too big to be displayed by GitHub](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/nixos-22.05/pkgs/top-level/all-packages.nix)

Reviewer: also local editors slow down due to file size and a badly written nix language server can deadlock when editing.

Author: Added a mention of local editors being slow

  - Then go to that file's definition, which takes quite some time for navigation (unless you have a plugin that can jump to it directly)

> - `all-packages.nix` frequently causes merge conflicts. It's a point of contention for all new packages

Reviewer: We should mention nix edit somewhere. This is the main way I get around the packages and is pretty easy and works for most packages very well.

Author: I'm mentioning `nix edit` in this section now

# Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

For all attributes at the root of nixpkgs `pkgs.<name>` which:
1. Are defined in `pkgs/top-level/all-packages.nix`
  (necessary so that the overlay containing the automatically discovered packages can be ordered directly before the `all-packages.nix` overlay without changing any behavior)
2. Are defined to be equal to `pkgs.callPackage <path> { }` such that all transitively referenced paths from the default Nix file of `<path>`:
  1. Are under the directory of `<path>`
    (necessary so that moving these files to a new directory doesn't break references in this package)
  2. Are not referenced from any paths outside of these transitive references

>     (necessary so that moving these files to a new directory doesn't break references in other packages)

Author: We discussed this [in yesterdays NAT meeting](https://discourse.nixos.org/t/2022-11-28-nixpkgs-architecture-team-meeting-19/23572#relative-file-references-8). We concluded that this is a good idea, but it's hard to understand what's written here, it should be reworded to something like "Limited to packages that can be moved without updating any file references"

Author: The tooling could also be regularly ran in CI, giving warnings for all packages that can't be moved automatically, along with an indication for why it couldn't be moved automatically. This is especially a list of special cases we need to take a look at then

Author: Updated the RFC to simplify the wording of this part

- Move the default Nix file from `<path>` to `pkgs/unit/<4-prefix name>/<name>/pkg-fun.nix` ([TODO: Justify why `unit`](https://github.com/nixpkgs-architecture/simple-package-paths/issues/16))
  - Where `<4-prefix name>` is the 4-letter prefix of `<name>`.
    If `<name>` has less than 4 characters, append `-` to the `<name>` until it's 4 characters long and use that as `<4-prefix name>`
- Additionally also move all paths transitively referenced by the default Nix file to `pkgs/unit/<4-prefix name>/<name>/???` [TODO](https://github.com/nixpkgs-architecture/simple-package-paths/issues/19)
- Remove the definition of that attribute in `pkgs/top-level/all-packages.nix`
- For each moved path, create a compatibility layer from the old to the new path, potentially using a symlink. See [compatibility] for more details

These attributes will newly be added to `pkgs` by automatically calling `pkgs.callPackage pkgs/unit/<4-prefix name>/<name>/pkg-fun.nix { }` on all entries in `pkgs/unit`. In order to make this more efficient, `builtins.readDir` should be optimized as described [here](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/issues/7314).

## Compatibility layer

> [compatibility]: #compatibility-layer

Reviewer 2: This may be more trouble than it's worth.

Author: I don't think it's much trouble, it doesn't take a lot of effort to implement

Reviewer 2: Any trouble at all is too much trouble of the effect isn't positive. By doing this we set a precedent that any file can be a public interface, while they're not supposed to.

Reviewer: The file layout was not a public interface before. We just move packages and paths around with no considerations of breakages.

Reviewer 3: I sort of agree with the sentiment of cost/benefit questions.

I think the main benefit is for people with am established muscle memory to quickly be redirected for the first couple of runs unil the muscle memory has adapted.

A one-line text file without any functionality other than informing the new location could just do.

No strong opinion, but maybe a way to scope this down a little.

Author: We discussed this [in yesterdays NAT meeting](https://discourse.nixos.org/t/2022-11-28-nixpkgs-architecture-team-meeting-19/23572#simple-package-paths-4). We concluded that we don't want a compatibility layer at all, because:
- The filesystem generally is not an API
  - While there's `pkgs.path`, it doesn't really make sense with overlays and config
  - There's `modulesPath` but that's specific to NixOS modules
  - There's `meta.position`, but only for debugging/better errors
- Especially with [the requirement for files to not be changed, only moved](https://github.com/nixpkgs-architecture/simple-package-paths/pull/20/files#r1035249558), not having a compatibility symlink works really nicely with PR's, as we believe git can handle rename merges properly

Author: Now removed the compatibility layer section, I added a mention to it in the alternatives section instead

TODO: Nix files should use `import` to act like a symlink while also giving a warning with `builtins.trace`. Something like

```nix
builtins.trace "warning: Using deprecated path ${./.}, use pkgs/unit/<name> instead, this will be removed after NixOS 22.05"

>   (import ../../pkgs/unit/name)

Reviewer: That does not work with ofborg and potentially spams people evaluation log.

Author: No it shouldn't, since nothing in nixpkgs evaluates these files anymore at that point.

```

When moving `pkgs/some/dir/default.nix` to the new `pkgs/unit/<4-prefix name>/<name>/pkg-fun.nix`, a symlink will be created pointing from the old to the new location. Reasoning:
- Current community discussions referencing old files from the `master` branch are still valid for some time. While GitHub doesn't provide an easy way to navigate to a symlink, seeing the path to where the file has moved is better than getting an error.
- It provides an opportunity for code referencing old paths to be updated. While it's not possible to give a deprecation warning with symlinks, users will at least be able to read it in the NixOS release notes. This doesn't occur often in practice.

> 

Reviewer: Code that does not expect a symlink due to bad writing will break. Probably acceptable.

How to make sure we do not collect dangling symlinks even in that one NixOS release? If anything gets moved afterwards I don't expect people to think about the symlink myself including.

Author: That's a good point, this increases the complexity of this compatibility layer by a lot. What we could do is limit it to exactly one release and remove it right after. This way we only need to check/correct for dead symlinks/Nix files once when the branch-off happens and can remove them in master afterwards. But yes this adds some complexity.

Author: Discussed in https://github.com/nixpkgs-architecture/simple-package-paths/pull/20#discussion_r1028999091

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

> Make trivial top-level attribute definitions in `pkgs/top-level/all-packages.nix` be auto-generated from a predictable attribute-based file hierarchy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Auto-generate trivial top-level attribute definitions in `pkgs/top-level/all-packages.nix`  from a sharded directory that matches the attribute name.
```

 - Simplify sentence structure.
 - Predictable hierarchy suggests actual hierarchy. I don't like adding sharded here, but just _directory_ would be equally wrong, compared to _hierarchy_.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

- (Especially new) package contributors are having a hard time figuring out which files to add or edit. These are very common questions:
  - Which directory should my package definition go in?
  - What are all the categories and do they matter?
  - What if the package has multiple matching categories?
  - Why can't I build my package after adding the package file?
  - Where in all-packages.nix should my package go?
- Figuring out where an attribute is defined is a bit tricky:
  - First one has to find the definition of it in all-packages.nix to see what file it refers to
    - On GitHub this is even more problematic, as the `all-packages.nix` file is [too big to be displayed by GitHub](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/nixos-22.05/pkgs/top-level/all-packages.nix)
  - Then go to that file's definition, which takes quite some time for navigation (unless you have a plugin that can jump to it directly)
    - It also slows down or even deadlocks editors due to the file size

>   - In some cases `nix edit` works, though that's not yet stable (it relies on Flakes being enabled) and comes with some problems ([doesn't yet open a writable file](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/issues/3347), doesn't work with packages that don't set `meta.position` correctly).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - `nix edit -f . package-attr` works, though that's not yet stable (it relies on the `nix-command` feature being enabled) and doesn't work with packages that don't set `meta.position` correctly).
```

`nix edit` existed before flakes iirc and it works.

```
~/nixpkgs$ nix edit -f . hello --extra-experimental-features nix-command
```

- `all-packages.nix` frequently causes merge conflicts. It's a point of contention for all new packages

# Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

Make a large part of `pkgs.<name>` definitions in `all-packages.nix` eligible to be moved to `pkgs/unit/<4-letter name>/<name>`.
The definition in `all-packages.nix` won't be necessary anymore, as all directories in `pkgs/unit/*/*` are automatically added to the `pkgs` set.

The criteria for `pkgs.<name>` becoming eligible are as follows:
1. <a id="criteria-1"/> Is defined in `pkgs/top-level/all-packages.nix`
  (necessary so that the overlay containing the automatically discovered packages can be ordered directly before the `all-packages.nix` overlay without changing any behavior)
2. <a id="criteria-2"/> Is defined to be equal to `pkgs.callPackage <path> { }`

> 3. <a id="criteria-3"/> All transitively referenced paths from the default Nix file of `<path>` are under the same directory as the default Nix file and can be moved around together without breaking any references in other Nix files (except the one reference in `pkgs/top-level/all-packages.nix`).

Reviewer 2: This is an implementation detail, not an intentional restriction.

Please separate the end goal from what the current tool can do.

Author: I guess you're thinking of the tool doing automatic fixing of references in Nix files when moving paths around? At least in all the cases I've seen, that's a violation of API boundaries: Packages shouldn't rely on paths outside of their own "unit" directory. And similarly the other way around. So as far as I can see, it's reasonable that the tool only supports this, and not just for the sake of simplifying the implementation.

Reviewer 2: I think the reader would like to know in a bit more detail what Nixpkgs will look like before diving into the technical details of the process of getting there.

> I guess you're thinking of the tool doing automatic fixing of references in Nix files when moving paths around?

That would be nice, but isn't really the point.

> >  implementation detail, not an intentional restriction

Suppose I want to move `cassandra` into `pkgs/unit`. Its files are referenced by `pkgs.cassandra` and `pkgs.cassandra_3_11`. Am I not allowed to move it, because it violates (2) and (3)?

Author: I rewrote the details section a bunch to not mention implementation details anymore.

If all criteria are satisfied, the package becomes eligible for the following changes:
- Move the default Nix file from `<path>` to `pkgs/unit/<4-prefix name>/<name>/pkg-fun.nix`
  - Where `<4-prefix name>` is the 4-letter prefix of `<name>`, equal to `substring 0 4 name`.
    If `<name>` has less than or exactly 4 characters, `<4-prefix name>` is equal to just `<name>`.
  - The directory `unit` [was chosen](https://github.com/nixpkgs-architecture/simple-package-paths/issues/16) for a future vision where it could be its own top-level directory, not only containing package definitions for software components, but also related NixOS modules, library components, etc.
- Move all paths transitively referenced by the default Nix file to `pkgs/unit/<4-prefix name>/<name>`
- Remove the definition of that attribute in `pkgs/top-level/all-packages.nix`

These attributes will newly be added to `pkgs` by automatically calling `pkgs.callPackage pkgs/unit/<4-prefix name>/<name>/pkg-fun.nix { }` on all entries in `pkgs/unit`. In order to ensure efficiency of this operation, `builtins.readDir` should be optimized as described [here](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/issues/7314).

> ## Transitioning

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Transition
```

> This RFC comes with [a reference tool](https://github.com/nixpkgs-architecture/simple-package-paths/pull/22) to make the above transition in an automated way.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This RFC comes with [a tool](https://github.com/nixpkgs-architecture/simple-package-paths/pull/22) to make the above transition in an automated way.
```

> If this RFC is accepted, the result of that tool will be PR'd to nixpkgs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If this RFC is accepted, the result of that tool will be used to create a pull request to nixpkgs.
```

> The tool itself will also be added to nixpkgs so that it can easily be ran again in the future.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The tool itself will also be added to nixpkgs so that it can easily be run again in the future.
```

"ran" is only simple past.

> For at least one release cycle, the legacy way of declaring packages should still be accepted, but the tool can be ran again at any point, thereby moving those new packages from the legacy paths to the new `pkgs/unit` paths.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For at least one release cycle, the legacy way of declaring packages should still be accepted, but the tool can be run again at any point, thereby moving those new packages from the legacy paths to the new `pkgs/unit` paths.
```

- `pkgs.readline63` doesn't fulfil [criteria 3](#user-content-criteria-3) (it [transitively references](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/nixos-22.05/pkgs/development/libraries/readline/6.3.nix#L23) `link-against-ncurses.patch`, which is [also referenced](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/nixos-22.05/pkgs/development/libraries/readline/7.0.nix#L30) by the definition for `pkgs.readline70`)
- `pkgs.fetchFromGitHub` doesn't fulfil the [criteria 4](#user-content-criteria-4) (it evaluates to a function), so it can't be moved into `pkgs/unit`

Here's how such a `pkgs/unit` directory structure would look like, note how all attribute names have the same level of nesting:
```
pkgs
└── unit
   ├── acpi
   │  ├── acpi
   │  ├── acpica-tools
   │  ├── acpid
   │  ┊
   ┊
   ├── auto
   │  ├── autossh
   │  ├── automirror
   │  ├── autosuspend
   │  ┊
   ┊
   ├── sl
   │  └── sl
   ┊
   ├── slac
   │  ├── slack
   │  ├── slack-cli
   │  └── slack-term
   ┊
   ├── zsh
   │  ├── zsh
   │  ├── zsh-autocomplete
   │  ├── zsh-completions
   ┊  ┊
```

# Interactions
[interactions]: #interactions

- `nix edit` is unaffected, since it uses a packages `meta.position` to get the file to edit.

>   Though with this RFC `nix edit` could be updated to not have to rely on that anymore for the packages in the new hierarchy in nixpkgs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

I don't think it can or should.

Author: If nixpkgs sufficiently exposes it as a stable API, I think it could. The benefit would be that `nix edit` could also work on packages where `meta.position` can't be evaluated, e.g. due to syntax errors. Additionally, `nix edit` might open the wrong file due to a builder not properly populating `meta.position`, this problem would also be avoided.

Author: We discussed this [in the last NAT meeting](https://discourse.nixos.org/t/2022-12-19-nixpkgs-architecture-team-meeting-22/24125#httpsgithubcomnixpkgs-architecturesimple-package-pathspull20discussion_r1051188387-4), I removed the sentence now

    - It also slows down or even deadlocks editors due to the file size
  - `nix edit -f . package-attr` works, though that's not yet stable (it relies on the `nix-command` feature being enabled) and doesn't work with packages that don't set `meta.position` correctly).
- `all-packages.nix` frequently causes merge conflicts. It's a point of contention for all new packages

# Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

This RFC establishes the convention of `pkgs/unit/${substring 0 4 name}/${name}` "unit" directories for the definitions of the Nix packages `pkgs.${name}` in nixpkgs.
The `pkg-fun.nix` files in all unit directories are automatically discovered, called using `pkgs.callPackage` and added to the `pkgs` set.

These requirements will be checked using CI:
1. <a id="req-1"/> The `pkgs/unit` directory must only contain unit directories, and only in subdirectories of the form `${substring 0 4 name}/${name}`.
2. <a id="req-2"/> Files outside a unit directory must not reference files inside that unit directory, and the other way around.
3. <a id="req-3"/> Each unit directory must have a `pkg-fun.nix` file such that `pkgs.callPackage ./pkg-fun.nix {}` evaluates to a derivation.

> 4. <a id="req-4"/> Packages defined by unit directories must not be defined or overridden anywhere else, such as in `pkgs/top-level/all-packages.nix`.

Author: I also codified these requirements that should be checked by CI

1. So that people don't pollute the `pkgs/unit` directory with wrong shards
2. Makes the unit self-contained which is a good thing to have in general, and we get this check essentially for free with the tooling for the transition. If this becomes a point of contention we could also remove this requirement though.
3. So we can always `callPackage`
4. So that we don't have one person adding a file in `all-packages.nix` and another in `pkgs/unit`, and one of them being ignored without any indication.

> 3. Each unit directory must have a `pkg-fun.nix` file such that `pkgs.callPackage ./pkg-fun.nix {}` evaluates to a derivation.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> 4. Packages defined by unit directories must not be defined or overridden anywhere else, such as in `pkgs/top-level/all-packages.nix`.

Author: ```suggestion
4. The definition of a package in the unit directory is the one `pkgs.<name>` points to.
5. To avoid problems with merges, if a package attribute is defined by a unit directory, it must not be defined in `pkgs/top-level/all-packages.nix` or `pkgs/top-level/aliases.nix`.
```

- Similarly `pkgs.gnumake42` in [`pkgs/development/tools/build-managers/gnumake/4.2/default.nix`](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/tree/nixos-22.05/pkgs/development/tools/build-managers/gnumake/4.2/default.nix) fulfils all criteria, even though its directory is nested in `pkgs.gnumake`'s directory, they don't reference each others files.
- `pkgs.zsh` matches all criteria, its default Nix file is moved to `pkgs/unit/zsh-/zsh/pkg-fun.nix`
- `pkgs.emptyFile` doesn't fulfil criteria 1 (it's defined in `pkgs/build-support/trivial-builders.nix`) and 2 (it's defined inline), so it can't be moved into `pkgs/unit`
- `pkgs.fetchFromGitHub` doesn't fulfil the criteria 3 (it evaluates to a function), so it can't be moved into `pkgs/unit`

Here's how such a `pkgs/unit` directory structure would look like, note how all attribute names have the same level of nesting:
```
pkgs
└── unit
   ├── acpi
   │  ├── acpi
   │  ├── acpica-tools
   │  ├── acpid
   │  ┊
   ┊
   ├── auto
   │  ├── autossh
   │  ├── automirror
   │  ├── autosuspend
   │  ┊
   ┊

>    ├── sl--

Reviewer 2: Why not `substring 0 4 "sl"`?

Likewise for zsh.

Reviewer 4: Allow me to paint a picture. 

Howard has been using Nix for one year. He excitedly makes his first PR to Nixpkgs.

The path names seem weird :

"foo/foo/default.nix"
"u/u/default.nix"
"emac/emacs/default.nix"

Howard is confused about the max length but tries his best, he PRs "libxz/libxz/default.nix". Howard gets an email requesting that he refilehis PR with a new name, he rolls his eyes "how was I supposed to guess that?", but tells himself he'll refile when he has some free time.

It is 6 months later. The seasons have changed, but Howard's PR has not. Stale Bot adds yet another notification to Robert's feed of stale PRs - left dying on the vine.

Nixpkgs is in shambles! If only the maintainers had chosen `jq--/jq/default.nix` this all could have been avoided!

</scene>

Author: [Another comment by @aakropotkin on Discourse](https://discourse.nixos.org/t/2022-11-21-nixpkgs-architecture-team-meeting-18/23393/4?u=infinisil)

Originally in the meeting we used `--` in case there's multiple levels of sharding, like

```
he/ll/hello
zs/h-/zsh
sl/--/sl
r-/--/r
```

This makes it clear that e.g. `sl` shouldn't be in `sl/sl/pkg-fun.nix` where it would collide with a package named `slsl` in `sl/sl/slsl/pkg-fun.nix`. `sl` being in `sl/--/sl/pkg-fun.nix` gets rid of the ambiguity.

However, later in the meeting we figured out that there's no good reason to have nested folders, so we changed it to 
```
```
hell/hello
zsh-/zsh
sl--/sl
r---/r
```

instead, which lines up very nicely still. But you're right roberth, with this scheme there's no super good reason for the `-` anymore.

I'm 50/50 on this, because as @aakropotkin mentions, the `-` do help with clarity, establishing that it's a 4-letter prefix, and not just the package name. Of course we could enforce either option with CI checks (and we totally should).

Reviewer 2: > The path names seem weird :
> 
> "foo/foo/default.nix"
> "u/u/default.nix"
> "emac/emacs/default.nix"

This is not realistic.
Only 1 in 22 packages is shorter than 4 characters, and only 1 in 8 isn't truncated.
Let's avoid solving problems that don't exist.

> CI checks (and we totally should).

I agree. We don't want to have any drift from the sharding specification, because that would defeat the point.

Reviewer: IMO filling up shorter packages with dashes is ugly. Can't we just trim them to a minimal length and keep them as is if they are not longer?

Author: @SuperSandro2000 Yes that's @roberth's proposal we're discussing here

Author: I updated the PR to use this proposal now

    This is not a goal of this RFC, but a motivation to make this a future possibility.
- `package.nix`/`pkg.nix`: Bad, because it makes the migration to a non-function form of overridable packages harder in the future.

## Alternate `pkgs/unit` location

- Use `unit` (at the nixpkgs root) instead of `pkgs/unit`.
  This is future proof in case we want to make the directory structure more general purpose, but this is out of scope
- Other name proposals were deemed worse: `pkg`, `component`, `part`, `mod`, `comp`

## Filepath backwards-compatibility

Additionally have a backwards-compatibility layer for moved paths, such as a symlink pointing from the old to the new location, or for Nix files even a `builtins.trace "deprecated" (import ../new/path)`.
- We are not doing this because it would give precedent to file paths being a stable API interface, which definitely shouldn't be the case (bar some exceptions).
- It would also lead to worse merge conflicts as the transition is happening, since Git would have to resolve a merge conflict between a symlink and a changed file.

## Not having the [reference requirement](#user-content-req-ref)

> The reference requirement could be removed, which would allow unit directories to reference files outside themselves, and the other way around. This is not great because it encourages the use of file paths as an API, rather than explicitly exposing functionality from Nix expressions.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The reference requirement could be removed, which would allow unit directories to reference files outside themselves, and the other way around. This is not great because it encourages the use of file paths as an API, rather than explicitly exposing functionality from Nix expressions.

## Relax design to try to attack issues like "package variants" up front

An issue with restrictions like the above one is that they don't work well for when we package a number of variants of package, e.g. different versions of the same package that share some infra. We do presume we would have to have *some* notion of "private details shared between multiple units" or "multiple entry points to unit" to handle these cases.

We've chosen to explicitly ignore these tough cases, and emphasize uniform structure of units over being able to migrate over as many packages as possible from the get go. The rationale for this decision is basically:

1. It is (a bit) easier to relax requirements later than tighten them later.
2. We plan on incrementally migrating Nixpkgs to this new system anyways, for caution's sake, so starting with fewer units is not only fine but *good*.
3. Explicitly marking use-cases out of scope allows us to have a more focused and thorough investigation of the use-cases that remain, to build a solid foundation.
```

    - It was an inconvenient user interface, requiring a checkout or browsing through GitHub
    - Many packages fit multiple categories, leading to multiple locations to search through instead of one
  - There's other better ways of discovering similar packages, e.g. [Repology](https://repology.org/)
- This breaks `builtins.unsafeGetAttrPos "hello" pkgs`. Counter-arguments:
  - This functionality is unsafe and therefore breakages can be expected
  - Support for this can be added to Nix (make `builtins.readDir` propagate file as a position)

# Alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

- Use a flat directory `pkgs/unit/*/pkg-fun.nix` instead, arguments:
  - Good because it's simpler, both for the user and for the code
  - Good because it speeds up Nix evaluation since there's only a single directory to call `builtins.readDir` on instead of many
    - With an optimized `readDir` this isn't much of a problem

>   - Bad because it causes GitHub to limit the rendering of that directory to 1'000 entries (and we have about 10'000 that benefit from this transition for a start)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Bad because the GitHub web interface only renders the first 1'000 entries (and we have about 10'000 that benefit from this transition, even given the restrictions)
```

  - Bad because it makes `git` slower ([TODO: By how much?](https://github.com/nixpkgs-architecture/simple-package-paths/issues/18))
  - Bad because directory listing slows down with many files

- Don't use `pkg-fun.nix` but another file name:

>   - `package.nix`/`pkg.nix`: Makes the migration to a non-function form of overridable packages harder in the future.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - `package.nix`/`pkg.nix`: Bad, because it makes the migration to a non-function form of overridable packages harder in the future.
```

Reviewer 2: We should rely on an implied meaning of the bullets below either.

- Additionally have a backwards-compatibility layer for moved paths, such as a symlink pointing from the old to the new location, or for Nix files even a `builtins.trace "deprecated" (import ../new/path)`.
  We are not doing this because it would give precedent to file paths being a stable API interface, which definitely shouldn't be the case (bar some exceptions).
  It would also lead to worse merge conflicts as the transition is happening, since Git would have to resolve a merge conflict between a symlink and a changed file.
- Loosen [criteria 3](#user-content-criteria-3), allowing certain packages to be moved to the new structure even if it requires updating references to paths in Nix files.
  This isn't done because it [turns out](https://github.com/nixpkgs-architecture/simple-package-paths/issues/14) that this criteria indicates the file structure being used as an API interface.
  By manually refactoring the Nix code to not rely on this anymore, you can increase code quality/reusability/clarity and then do the transition described in the RFC.
- Use a different sharding scheme than `<4-prefix name>`.

>   Discussions regarding this can be seen [here](https://github.com/nixpkgs-architecture/simple-package-paths/issues/1), [NAT meeting #18](https://github.com/nixpkgs-architecture/meetings/blob/6282b0c6bbc47b6f1becd155586c79728eddefc9/2022-11-21.md) and [here](https://github.com/nixpkgs-architecture/simple-package-paths/pull/20#discussion_r1029004083)

Reviewer 2: Should be summarized here.

Author: I redid the alternatives section, including writing a summary of this one here

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved]: #unresolved-questions

# Future work
[future]: #future-work

All of these questions are in scope to be addressed in future discussions in the [Nixpkgs Architecture Team](https://nixos.org/community/teams/nixpkgs-architecture.html):

> - This RFC only addresses the top-level attribute namespace, aka packages in `pkgs.<name>`, it doesn't do anything about package sets like `pkgs.python3Packages.<name>`, `pkgs.haskell.packages.ghc942.<name>`, which could also benefit from a similar auto-calling

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- This RFC only addresses the top-level attribute namespace, aka packages in `pkgs.<name>`, it doesn't do anything about package sets like `pkgs.python3Packages.<name>`, `pkgs.haskell.packages.ghc942.<name>`, which may or may not benefit from a similar auto-calling
```

# Alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

- Use a flat directory `pkgs/unit/*/pkg-fun.nix` instead, arguments:

>   - Good because it speeds up Nix evaluation since there's only a single directory to call `builtins.readDir` on instead of many
>     - With an optimized `readDir` this isn't much of a problem
>   - Good because it's simpler, both for the user and for the code

Reviewer 2: Swap.

```suggestion
  - Good because it's simpler, both for the user and for the code
  - Good because it speeds up Nix evaluation since there's only a single directory to call `builtins.readDir` on instead of many
    - With an optimized `readDir` this isn't much of a problem
```

  - Bad because it causes GitHub to limit the rendering of that directory to 1'000 entries (and we have about 10'000 that benefit from this transition for a start)

>   - Bad because it makes `git` slower ([TODO: By how much?](https://github.com/nixpkgs-architecture/simple-package-paths/issues/18))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Bad because it makes `git` slower ([TODO: By how much?](https://github.com/nixpkgs-architecture/simple-package-paths/issues/18))
  - Bad because directory listing slows down with many files
```

This is the main reason why most object stores and CDNs prefix their hash paths with directories ab/cd/efg.... .
